# 15. `PART 1` Basic concepts of object-oriented paradigm. Class, object, instantiation. Inheritance, class hierarchy. Polymorphism, method overloading. Scoping, information hiding, accessibility levels. Abstract classes and interfaces. Class diagram of UML. `PART 2` Compare the SNMP and RMON network management systems.

## Part 1

### OOP

Object-oriented programming is a programming model that emphasizes objects. The object-oriented programming model considers data important rather than actions or functions. OOP is not a programming language but a model that other programming languages follow, it was brought into the spotlight because of the popularity of Java and is now ubiquitous everywhere like C++ which is an OOP implementation of C, C#, and Python. There are four pillars of OOP:

- Abstraction – Abstraction means to hide the implementation details. When we call a function, we do not need to understand what it is exactly doing. This allows us to abstract a lot of functions in a big codebase and focuses on building better applications. This also helps us create reusable and easy-to-understand and easy-to-change code by abstracting away certain details. The function could be defined in a separate class and can be called, we can simply pass the parameters and get the output.
- Polymorphism – This means the condition of occurring in several different forms. This is the method in an OOP language that performs different things as per the object’s class which calls it. With polymorphism, a message is sent to multiple class objects, and every object responds appropriately according to the properties of its class. There are typical kinds of polymorphism, static polymorphism like method overloading and dynamic polymorphism like method overriding.
- Inheritance – This lets one class acquire the attributes and methods of another class. The main benefit here is reusability. We might have multiple things that do mostly the same thing with small changes, here we use inheritance. The parent and the child will be closely related for it to make sense. A child class will inherit all its parents’ attributes and methods, then it can extend to it and have its attributes and methods on top of the ones from the parent. For example, we might have a main class Car, we can then create two new child classes from it called BMW and AUDI and they can have their additions based on their features. Single inheritance is when a class has only one parent class, multiple inheritances are when a child class has more than one parent class. Multi-level inheritance is when for example class 3 inherits from class 2 which also inherits from class 1 and hierarchal inheritance is when a single parent’s class has multiple child classes like the car example. If a child class has a method that is inherited from its parent, but requires a different implementation, here we can use method overriding, this is changing the implementation of an already present method.
- Encapsulation – This refers to the bundling of data with methods into a single unit. OOPs, languages use encapsulation in the form of a class which is a program code template that allows developers to create an object that has both the data and the functions/methods. This implementation is used to hide the internal representation or state of an object from the outside. The idea is to hide the attribute of the object from the outside and bundle it with methods that provide read or write access to it, this way we can hide specific information and control access to the internal state of the object. In java, we use getters and setter methods. The getter methods retrieve an attribute and the setter method changes it.

### Class

Class is a blueprint or a set of instructions to build a specific type of object. It revolves around real-life entities or objects, like a car can be a class and have data like the color and manufacture date and methods like returning the mileage based on the car’s life. A class is a logical entity and in Java, it is declared using the class keyboard for example class Student{}.

### Object

An object is an instance of a class, it is a real-world entity such as a laptop, mobile, etc, it is a physical entity. An object in Java is mainly created through the new keyword, for example, Student s1 = new Student(), here we define an object with the name s1 and it is of the class Student. A class is declared once since it is the blueprint, but we can have as many objects of that class, every time we create a new object, we allocate memory to it.

### Instantiation

Instantiation is the creation of an object which is an instance of a given class. When we instantiate an object, we define its attributes which are requested by the class, this allocates memory for this object.

### The class hierarchy

The class hierarchy is also called the inheritance tree. Due to inheritance a child class can extend or inherit from its parent class, this can form a hierarchy. A child class can inherit from one parent class or multiple parent classes, a parent class can have multiple child classes. This hierarchy can be as deep as needed and can branch out in any direction.

### Method overloading

Method overloading is a form of polymorphism. Overloading happens when we have two methods of the same name but different arguments. These methods are differentiated based on the number and type of parameters passed as arguments. An example could be, we have two methods of the same name sum, the first method is defined as having 2 integer inputs and the second method is defined as having 3 floating-point inputs. Now if we call this sum(1,2), then the program will call the first method, but if we call sum(1.0,2.5,4.5), then we will call the second method. The advantage of method overloading is that it increases code readability and maintainability. The appropriate method is called for which the arguments are provided during runtime.

### Scope

The scope of an entity such as a variable defines in what part of a computer program that name can be used to refer to the entity. In other parts of the program, the same name may refer to a different entity or it might not exist at all. We have two types of scope in an OOP language like Java. Global and local scope, global scope belongs to the class and is usable anywhere in the code while local scope belongs to a certain block and only usable within that block.

### Information hiding

Information hiding is about protecting data or information from changing them by mistake throughout the program. It protects data from modification by other parts of the program. This hidden data can be accessed indirectly using safe mechanisms or methods.

### Accessibility levels

Private, protected and the public are the accessibility levels. Public attributes and functions are available to every type of object that attempts to access them. Protected attributes and functions can be accessed within their package, or by a subclass of its class in another package. Private attributes and functions can only be accessed by their class.

### Abstract class

An abstract class is declared with the abstract keyword. It can have abstract and nonabstract methods. This class cannot be instantiated, but it can be subclassed. When an abstract class is subclassed, the subclass provides implementations for all the abstract methods in the parent class. An abstract method is declared without an implementation.

### Interface

An interface is just the declaration of methods of an object, it is not the implementation. In an interface, we define the kind of operations an object can perform. These operations are defined by the class that implements the interface.

### UML

A unified modeling language UML class diagram is a structure diagram that describes the structure of a system by showing the classes, their attributes, their methods, and the relationships among objects. It is like a relational schema for databases. The classes are represented as rectangles having two parts, the attributes or the characteristics of that object, and the methods or the functions of that object. Each attribute will have its datatype defined, like string or integer. The methods will have open and close parenthesis to show that they are the methods. For all attributes and methods, we show the visibility or accessibility with different symbols: - sign means this attribute or method is private and can only be accessed by its class, + means this attribute or method is public and can be accessed by anything in the source code, # means this attribute or method is protected and can be accessed by its class or any subclasses, and ~ means this attribute or method is packaged and can be accessed by anything in its package. Attributes are generally private, and the methods are public or protected. Once we have defined separate classes, we create the relationships between them. Inheritance is represented by an arrow, using inheritance we can define multiple child classes which are like the parent class but require some changes, for example, an animal abstract class can be used to create a lion, zebra, and a gorilla without having to repeat the same attributes and methods. An abstract class cannot be instantiated on its own, but it is instantiated through a subclass, these are written with italics in the UML diagram. Another type of relationship is association shown with a straight line, this is a simple relationship without any dependency between two classes, for example, the class cow eats class grass. The next type of relationship is aggregation, which is shown with a line and an empty diamond, in this relationship a class can be a part of the other class, but it does not have to be, there are no strict rules. The last type of relationship is composition, this is shown as a straight line with a filled-in diamond. In this relationship, the child object will not exist without the parent object, for example, a house class and a bedroom class. The bedroom will not exist if the house class is destroyed. This way we can model an application by representing its classes and the relationships between them.

## Part 2

### SNMP

SNMP or simple network management protocol is a way for different devices on a network to share information. It allows devices to communicate even if the devices are different hardware and run different software. It is a vital tool for effective network management. SNMP is a simple architecture based on a client-server model. The servers are called managers, they collect and process information about devices on the network. The clients are called agents, these are any device connected to the network. They can include computers, network switches, phones, printers, and so on. To provide flexibility, SNMP doesn’t require network devices to exchange data in a rigid format of fixed size. Instead, it uses a tree-like format, under which data is always available for managers to collect, thus we use the UDP protocol and SNMP works on the UDP port number 161 by default. The data tree consists of multiple tables or branches which are called management information bases or MIBs. MIBs group together particular types of devices, each MIB has a unique identifying number and an identifying string. These numbers and strings can be used interchangeably. Each MIB consists of one or more nodes, which represent individual devices on the network and each node has a unique object identifier or OID. The OID for a given node is determined by the identifier of the MIB on which it exists combined with the node’s identifier within its MIB. Using OID a manager can query an agent to find information about a device on the network, for example, if the manager wants to know whether an interface is up, it will first query the interface MIB, then check the OID value which tells the operational status to determine if the interface is up. When the admin asks for the status of a device, it's called polling, and when a device replies, it’s called a trap or a notification.

### RMON

RMON or remote monitoring is an extension to SNMP. RMON is a method of monitoring network traffic on a remote ethernet to find network issues. These issues can be dropped packets, network collisions, or traffic congestion. RMON was developed to address the weak points of a standard MIB, which could not provide statistics on the data link and physical layer parameters. With RMON, a network admin can set up performance thresholds that create alerts when these thresholds are crossed, this allows us to maintain a proactive network management strategy. RMON probes are hardware or software elements of a network device or a software embedded device like a router or a switch. The RMON probe is set on the device on a TCP/IP subnet, this software runs on the network device and gets the information about the network and traffic activity. This information can be passed back to the SNMP manager console for analysis and reporting.

### Differences between SNMP and RMON

The differences between SNMP and RMON are, SNMP is a device-oriented protocol and focuses on how devices are functioning over the network while RMON is more network-oriented. While SNMP is used for monitoring devices over the network, RMON monitors the network itself and provides information to the network administrator which can be used to troubleshoot and make changes according to the needs of the network. Another difference between SNMP and RMON is that SNMP runs on preconfigured software to ensure that the network runs optimal, but RMON gives the ability to the network administrator to use the information and make the network run at peak performance. RMON is usually used to do an in-depth analysis of the network to a point that it can be used to find out how many bytes and packets were transferred and if any were dropped to bandwidth and internet access. An SNMP device, such as a router usually needs additional software installed on it to provide RMON functionality to turn it into a probe. SNMP is always the first line of defense when retrieving information about the network and what is happening in the network, RMON is an extension and makes it easier and gives us more information.
